---
layout: glossary
title: Site Impacts
article: 7
section: 6
toc: true
---

## 7.6.1 Dust and Air Pollution

Dust and other types of air pollution that can be borne by the wind from the use must be controlled through appropriate landscape, sheltering, paving, wetting, collecting, or other means.

## 7.6.2 Electromagnetic Interference

Electromagnetic interference from any use must not adversely affect the operation of any equipment located off the lot where the interference originates.

## 7.6.3 Glare and Heat

Any activity or the operation of any use that produces glare or heat must be conducted so that no glare or heat from the activity or operation is detectable at any point off-site. Flickering or intense sources of light must be fully shielded.

## 7.6.4 Hazardous Materials

The use, storage, handling, transport, discharge, and disposal of hazardous materials, or materials that present potential fire and explosion hazards, must comply with applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. Radioactive and hazardous material waste must be transported, stored, and used in conformance with all federal, state, and local laws.

## 7.6.5 Noise

No use may be conducted in a manner that generates a sound level that is in violation of Chapter 293, Noise, of the City Code.

## 7.6.6 Odors

No use may emit odors of an intensity and character as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. Odors lasting less than 15 minutes for every 24-hour period are exempt.

## 7.6.7 Vibration

No use may produce continuous, frequent, or repetitive vibrations that exceed 0.002g peak at up to 50 cycles per second frequency off-site, measured by seismic or electronic vibration measuring equipment, such as an accelerometer. Vibrations from vehicles that leave the site, such as trucks, trains, airplanes, and helicopters, are exempt from this requirement. Vibrations lasting less than five minutes for every 24- hour period are exempt.