---
layout: glossary
title: Rules of Interpretation
article: 2
section: 1
toc: true
---

## 2.1.1 Definitions

Whenever a defined word appears in the Ordinance, its meaning is as set forth in this article. Words not defined in this Ordinance are interpreted in accord with their usual dictionary meaning and customary usage.

## 2.1.2 Current Versions and Citations

All references to other regulations or manuals in this Ordinance refer to the most current version and citation for those regulations or manuals, unless expressly indicated otherwise. When the referenced regulations or documents have been repealed and not replaced by other regulations or manuals, Ordinance requirements for compliance are no longer in effect.

## 2.1.3 Delegation of Authority

Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or another officer or employee of the City to perform an act or duty, that provision will be interpreted as authorizing the department head or officer to delegate that responsibility to others over whom he or she has authority.

## 2.1.4 Text and Graphics

Illustrations, diagrams, and flowcharts are included in this Ordinance to illustrate the intent and requirements of the text. In the case of a conflict between the text and any illustration, diagram, or flowchart, the text controls.

## 2.1.5 Lists and Examples

Unless otherwise expressly indicated, lists of items or examples that use "including," "such as," or similar terms are intended to provide examples only, and must not be construed as being limited to the items or examples listed.

## 2.1.6 Time

1. When a number of days is specified as a period from a certain day within which or after or before which an act is authorized or required to be done, time is computed as the number of calendar days excluding the calendar day when the act is authorized or required to be done.
2. In computing any specified period of time from a specified event, the day on which the event happens is deemed the day from which an act is authorized or required to be done.
3. If the period is of two days, Saturday, Sunday, or a public holiday is excluded if it is an intervening day between the day when an act is authorized or required to be done and the last day of the period.

## 2.1.7 Fractions

Any fraction greater than or equal to 0.5 will be
rounded up to nearest whole number. Any fraction
less than 0.5 will be rounded down to nearest
whole number.

## 2.1.8 Mandatory, Prohibitory, and Permissive Terms

1. "Must," "will," and "shall" are mandatory terms that express a requirement or impose a duty.
2. "Must not," "will not," "shall not," "may not," and "no... may" express a prohibition.
3. "Should" expresses a suggestion or recommendation, and does not express a requirement or impose a duty.
4. "May" is permissive.

## 2.1.9 Conjunctions

1. "And" indicates that all connected words or provisions apply.
2. "Or" indicates that the connected words or provisions may apply singly or in any combination.
3. "Either [...] or" indicates that the connected words or provisions apply singly, but not in combination.

## 2.1.10 Common Abbreviations

The following are abbreviations used within this Ordinance:
1. "DBH" is an abbreviation for "diameter at breast height."
2. "GFA" is an abbreviation for "gross floor area."
3. "MAX" is an abbreviation for "maximum."
4. "MIN" in an abbreviation for "minimum."
5. "MPH" is an abbreviation for "miles per hour."
6. "N/A" is an abbreviation for "not applicable."
7. "SF" is an abbreviation for "square feet."
8. "TDM" is an abbreviation for "Transportation Demand Management."
9. "VPD" is an abbreviation for "vehicles per day."
10. "VLR" is an abbreviation for "visible light reflectance."
11. "VLT" is an abbreviation for "visible light transmittance."

## 2.1.11 Gender

Words denoting one gender apply to all genders.

## 2.1.12 Number

The singular includes the plural and vice versa.

## 2.1.13 Tense

The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the present.
